# July 2015

(Discuss this [on the forums](https://forums.shintolin.com/discussion/13/state-of-the-game-july-2015).)

Welcome to the first ever "State of the Union address"-style post for `Shintolin`. I'd like to do these roughly quarterly, so be on the lookout for the next one this October.

In this address I'm going to talk about where we've come from over the last couple of weeks, and where I think we're going over the next two or three months.

## Pre-History

I believe everyone currently playing the game knows that there was a prior version of the game (hosted at `shintolin.co.uk`). For the annals of history I'd like to summarize what has come before us (feel free to skip this if you'd like):

* **March 2009**: [Isaac](https://github.com/IsaacLewis) launches `Shintolin`
* **October 2009**: [Nexus War](http://www.nexuswar.com/) shuts down; the "Nexal Invasion" of `Shintolin` begins
* **November 2009**: A serious bug (the "White Screen of Death") prevented anyone from playing for over a month; in response, **Isaac** [open sourced](https://github.com/IsaacLewis/Shintolin) `Shintolin`
* **February 2010**: [Buttercup](https://github.com/Buttercup2k) and **Miko** began developing `Shintolin` in Isaac's stead
* **October 2010**: `Shintolin` development pauses
* **June 2011** - **August 2011**: `Shintolin` development briefly resumes, then stops again
* **June 2012** - **September 2012**: Another brief spurt of `Shintolin` development
* **January 2013** - **December 2013**: Seeing the lack of activity (and flagging player counts) [Ecce](https://www.shintolin.com/profile/ecce) works on a new version of `Shintolin` using a new codebase
* **December 2013**: **Ecce** proposes that he take over the existing Shintolin game; **Buttercup** declines
* **May 2014**: **Buttercup** asks **Ecce** to become an administrator of `Shintolin`; responsible for helping to quell a zerg problem that got out of hand
* **July 2014**: One last code change by **Buttercup**
* **July 2014**: **Ecce** again proposes that he take over `Shintolin` development (this time offering to buy it from **Buttercup**); **Buttercup** again rejects the offer
* **June 2015**: **Buttercup** [shuts down the game](http://shintolin.forumcircle.com/viewtopic.php?p=21189#21189), rejects **Ecce**'s offer to take over the hosting of the current database (to keep player's characters intact), and rejects **Ecce**'s offer to take over the forums (to keep prior conversation threads alive and relevant)
* **June 2015**: **Ecce** launches [shintolin.com](https://www.shintolin.com) using a new codebase designed from scratch

## Launch Retrospective

**Thank you** to all of you who have helped me resurrect `Shintolin`. I wasn't sure there was sufficient interest to make this worth doing, but decided to take a leap of faith - and you have all proven that there is at least a chance of bringing this game back to a being a thriving, relevant choice in the free, persistent browser-based MMO game space. You all get an extra special thank you for being so patient with me as you helped to identify the many bugs and missing features that were still to be found after launch.

As a thank you, all players that joined within the first two weeks of the `Shintolin` relaunch (before July 16th at 23:59 GMT) will be granted the *"Beta Tester" badge* in the **new Badges system**, an early version of which will launch by the end of this week.

## UI/UX Modernization

As the rush to fix the initial mega-bugs slowed down, my attention turned toward something of a pet-peeve of mine: `Classic Shintolin`'s horribly outdated **user interface**. That effort is now "complete" in that I've reached my original goal of updating all of the old screens to be something I considered usable/playable. I also spent extra attention to make sure the game played well on a **smartphone or tablet**. You'll continue to see UI tweaks and perhaps whole overhauls as time goes on, but the focus can now finally shift over toward the actual gameplay mechanics - in other words, making Shintolin fun to play.

## New Gameplay Mechanics & Balance

You've started to see a few **new or modified gameplay features** get rolled out. Just today *longhouses* and *cottages* gained the ability to store items like a stockpile. Last week the *hunger system* was revamped to act as an AP-recovery debuff instead of something that reduced your character's health and could ultimately kill it. There is an innumerable list of such features that can be built and tweaked to help make the game more fun for all players, new and experienced. That said, you're going to start to see a shift in how these features are discussed, considered, and implemented moving forward. Rather than consider every mechanic or every point of balance independently, as has been done in the past, I'm going to start taking a "top down" view of these mechanics and implement or tweak mechanics that move `Shintolin` toward **fun, cooperative, social gameplay mechanics**.

## Core Gameplay Mechanics

In both the current iteration of `Shintolin` and the `Classic Shintolin` version there has been one overarching weakness to the game: there is no reason to play it. What makes it fun? What is the point? What is a player supposed to try and accomplish? Certainly some players (*Achievers*) would try to reach maximul level, some would sit in a hut or longhouse and roleplay (*Socializers*), and some would murder & pillage other settlements (*Killers*) but there wasn't much gameplay to support any of those archetypes - and certainly nothing to encourage **bringing players together**. I want to fix that. Here is how I'm going to approach it.

`Shintolin` is a game about a land of **primitive people**, coming together to **seek the favor of their spirits** and **start the first vestiges of their civilization**. You can play the game as a lone wanderer if you wish, but to get the most out of the game you will want to start or join a settlement. `Shintolin` will be balanced under the assumption that you are part of a health settlement. Lets learn a bit more about **the favor of the spirits**:

* **Settlements** will have to build *Shrines* to the spirit(s) of their choice. Settlement **members** can give offerings to those shrines (the mechanics of said offering will differ by the kind of *spirit*) which ultimately grant **favor** toward the Settlement, **not the player**.
* `Shintolin` will support (and to a certain extent) encourage competition between settlements, but the primary means of progress will be via cooperation between the members of a settlement. This is not `Dealt In Lead` and *raiding/PvP* is not the *focus* of the game. Raiding another settlement can **harm their favor**, but will never **increase your own.**
* At the end of each **Cycle** the settlement with the **highest total favor** will be granted **boons** by the gods. Sometimes these boons will be **temporary** (lasting for the next **Cycle**), sometimes they will be **permanent** (items or *Badges* that you cannot otherwise obtain), and sometimes they will be **a mixture of both.** The boons will be announced before the beginning of the **Cycle**.
* **Cycles** will last for one real-world month to start, and are intended to eventually last three months.
* Unlike [Nexus Clash](http://www.nexusclash.com/) and other games, a new Cycle **does not reset** your character's progress, the map, a settlement's buildings, or anything else beyond the favor that has been accrued by each settlement.

I'm still working out the individual mechanics that will drive this new style of gameplay, but the above should get your head pointed in the right direction. I hope to **launch the first Cycle on August 1st**. If you want to be well prepared for the first Cycle, here are some tips:

* If you aren't part of one already, **join a settlement now**. If you aren't a part of a settlement you have no chance at a boon, and joining a settlement too late in the Cycle will mean you don't earn any of that settlement's rewards if they are the victor.
* Ensure your members have a **mixture of skills**: hunting, farming, construction, exploration. I'm going to be looking for mechanics that encourage the full use of the skill tree.
* **~~Do not~~** ~~build any shrines yet; I can't promise that I won't significantly change them.~~ *FYI: I have temporarily disabled shrine creation just-in-case.*

## New Player Experience

Once the above gameplay systems have been put in place and had some time to gel, I'd like to focus on the new player experience. I'd like to add **a tutorial**, easy ways for experienced players to **mentor** newer ones, and additional ways to **contribute immediately** to the success of a settlement. With some of these new experiences in place I will begin advertising the game elsewhere in ~October, and work to **increase the population** of `Shintolin`.

These are exciting times for `Shintolin`. This land has a rich history already, but you all are present for the very first days of a new era. Thank you for coming along with me on this ride - I can't wait to see what happens next.

(Discuss this [on the forums](https://forums.shintolin.com/discussion/13/state-of-the-game-july-2015).)

